---
layout: post
title:  "Whispering/Translating during DH2014: Five Things We Learned"
date:   2014-07-21 10:29:48 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---

> Need translation? GO::DH and MCML Partner on Initiative for
> Multi-Lingual Participation <http://t.co/9WEGsAzvrt>
> [\#dh2014](https://twitter.com/hashtag/dh2014?src=hash)\
> — Global Outlook DH (@GlobalOutlookDH) [July 7,
> 2014](https://twitter.com/GlobalOutlookDH/statuses/486075191748202496)

> [@GlobalOutlookDH](https://twitter.com/GlobalOutlookDH) & MLMC
> organize initiative for volunteer ad-hoc translators for non-English
> speakers at [\#dh2014](https://twitter.com/hashtag/dh2014?src=hash)
> <http://t.co/VITm4q2iNt>\
> — ADHO (@ADHOrg) [July 7,
> 2014](https://twitter.com/ADHOrg/statuses/486065957597872128)

A couple of weeks ago I travelled to Lausanne Switzerland for DH2014
where I helped organize and run the GO::DH/MLMC “I whisper\_\_\_” pins
initiative. The idea behind was simple and informal: Those attendants
who were willing to help out translating to/from any language being used
at the conference could ask me or Alex Gil for a pin, write down the
languages they could help out in, and then wear it for the rest of the
conference ready to use their linguistic skills as needed. The
whispering idea had its roots in other GO::DH members’ experience in
Cuba, in which a person would literally whisper/interpret the talk being
given to those who couldn’t follow it. But this is the first time (to
our knowledge) that anything like this has been done at DH so it was all
about experimenting and coming up with how it could be implemented, how
attendants were going to respond to it, how much it was going to be put
into practice, and bunch of other questions. So for about a day and half
we gave away close to a hundred pins and heard what people said when
they approached us. My analytic side wishes we had recorded what
languages were being written down in them to get a better idea of the
linguistic communities that seem to be craving this kind of exercise
more. We didn’t, but I remember seeing Arabic, Catalan, Dutch, English,
French, Galician, German, Greek, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Norwegian,
Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, and surely others.

**First thing we learned:** there are considerably more languages moving
around the conference than ADHO's official languages.

**Second thing we learned:** we didn’t know what to do about English:
take it as the starting point language or as another of the languages
present in the conference. As we were giving out pins, some were unsure
whether to write “English” down or not. I hope I’m not reading too much
into this, but it seemed that not writing it was an indication that we
were taking for granted that we can all communicate in English and that
it’s all the other languages that needed bridging to/from English. I
have the wonderful Glen Worthey to thank for pointing out that we should
write down English too as *another* language of the conference. That way
English speakers could ask for translation during presentations in
another language, even when as we know there weren’t many of them, it
was a possibility. That also meant that, for instance, a French speaker
could come to a Spanish language presentation and someone could help
interpreting between these two languages without necessarily using
English as a meeting point, even though it might be so for many. Some
participants acknowledged that even though they could translate, for
example, between Dutch and English, it wouldn’t be needed. Perhaps, it
really wasn't, still, we encouraged them to take a pin and make it
patent, just in case.So when anybody asked “should I write English as
well?” we said yes.

<div class="img_row">
    <img class="col three" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/godhpins1.jpg">
</div>

The initiative was warmly welcomed and turned out to be quite loud for a
whisper. On Twitter and in person we kept hearing what a great idea it
was, and how excited people were about putting on the pins. On the
second day of the conference, [Aurélien
Berra](https://twitter.com/aurelberra/status/486785387655073792) sent
out an “emergency request” for whisperers when much of the audience left
the room right before the beginning of a talk in French. Similarly,
[Sarah Potvin](https://twitter.com/sp_meta/status/487151080162480128)
asked us to whisper in the bilingual session she was chairing on
Thursday. It was precisely at this session where [Nuria Rodríguez
Ortega](https://twitter.com/gworthey/status/487177838823759872) was
giving a short paper in Spanish that the potential of the initiative
came into view, not just translation wise, but also as a community
exercise. Initially, we imagined we would actually be able to whisper,
but time was scarce, the audience was big, and the room was large, so
actual whispering wasn’t going to do it. We asked everyone how they’d
like to do it and Lisa Spiro suggested we [whispered through
live-tweeting](https://twitter.com/sp_meta/status/487178008600780801).
So we live-tweeted in English as much and as clearly as we could from
Nuria’s talk (apologies for the most typos I’ve ever done in 10
minutes). Still with the feeling that there should have been a simpler
way, after the session ended, [someone suggested using a Google
Doc](https://twitter.com/sp_meta/status/487178477960179712) in the
future so we didn’t have the 140 character constraint and so that it was
easier for the attendants to follow just the talk instead of filtering
out from among all the other conference tweets. By the final day of the
conference, [calls for
whisperers](https://twitter.com/elikaortega/status/487502301461245952)
were coming from different sessions. 

**Third thing we learned:** people
are ready for these initiatives, they’re willing to take part in them,
they want to pitch in and deal with the messiness they entail, and there
are lots of good ideas we hadn’t even imagined that we’re looking
forward to incorporate.

Throughout the days of the conference, it was very exciting to see that
it was, indeed a lot of people who were wearing their pins with two,
three, four and yes, even five languages written down in them! Yes, at
coffee breaks and sessions we were all mostly communicating in English,
but––maybe this was the real whisper, the one we all needed to hear––in
each pin there was a visible, tangible presence of all the other
languages, a reminder that there is always a language (or many) that we
need help in. **Fourth thing we learned:** If nothing else, the “I
whisper\_\_\_” pins helped us realize (really become aware) just how
multilingual DH really is, and wonder how much more it can become.

<div class="img_row">
    <img class="col three" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/godhpins2.jpg">
</div>

Even though I'm biased, overall, my impression is that the initiative was
successful. That said, it also raised a lot of questions and it wasn’t
put into practice as much as it could have been. By the end of the
conference, most dhwhisperers didn’t do any whispering, partly perhaps
because we were all just trying it out, seeing what would happen, taking
part and observing at the same time. However, I wonder how many of us
presented in English when we could've presented in any of ADHO's
official languages for reasons like those mentioned by [Martin
Grandjean](http://www.martingrandjean.ch/multilinguisme-dans-la-science-dh2014/)
or others. I wonder too how many of us would consider switching to
another language now that we know there is someone to help translate for
others, if we knew our language choice would not interfere with the
audience's interest in our work, or if the hype of being subject to
whispering increased our work's visibility. Is this something that can
impact the submission and reviewing process in the future? All the
unanswered questions, I believe, highlight the significance of the
initiative as well as the aspects we have to work on further. **Fifth
thing we learned:** if an experimental initiative that was in the making
for only two weeks had such a positive impact, we can only imagine it
would really flourish in the future if we sustain it and improve it.

Needless to say there is still a lot to do: better coordination with
program committees, session chairs, presenters, and audiences would
surely help getting a better grasp of what languages will have a
stronger presence, what kind of translation (whispering, live-tweeting,
Google Doc) might work, when, and where. Still, even though a part of me
wants to make this a more organized and structured initiative so that it
works better in the future––if we're lucky enough to continue it––I hope
to keep much of its spontaneity so that it is still an invitation to
play, so that it seems fun (it was!), so that it brings people together,
and so that many more ideas pop up because there is no script, this is
after all a really long conversation.

**Acknowledgements:** The whole GO::DH mailing list and Executive
Committee and especially Dan O’Donnell for providing the funding for the
pins. Everyone who picked up a pin, wore it, tweeted about the
initiative, translated, requested translation, etc. Elizabeth Burr and
everyone at ADHO’s Multilingualism/Multiculturalism Committee [for
endorsing the initiative and spreading the word about
it](http://adho.org/announcements/2014/godh-and-mcml-partner-initiative-multi-lingual-participation).
Neil Fraistat, ADHO’s chair until then, for supporting the initiative
from the beginning and giving us a kind [shout out during his opening
address](http://adho.org/announcements/2014/adho-chair-neil-fraistat-welcomes-dh-2014-participants).
The local organizers, and the program committee, particularly Kevin
Baumer and Melissa Terras, for facilitating our presence around the
registration table. And a very special thank you to Bethany Nowviskie
for generously [mentioning us](http://nowviskie.org/2014/anthropocene/)
in her enlightening keynote paper.
