---
layout: post
title:  "Hispanic Legacies in Electronic Literature: The Trace of Experimental Writing in Spain and Latin America"
date:   2014-11-18 10:29:48 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---

The first [AAHD](http://aahd.com.ar/) Digital Humanities conference is
taking place in [Buenos Aires on November
17-19](http://aahd.com.ar/blog-de-las-jornadas/). The occasion is
special for a number of reasons, most importantly for me
because—although I didn’t get to go—the wonderful [Alex
Saum-Pascual](http://twitter.com/alexsaum)will be debuting our E-Lit
exhibit project *Hispanic Legacies in Electronic Literature: The Trace
of Experimental Writing in Spain and Latin America.* Presenting this
project for the first time in Argentina is meaningful in several ways
for us. First of all, there is a long tradition of E-Lit creative
production, perhaps best exemplified in the Northern hemisphere by María
Uribe’s extremely well known and widely exhibited Anipoemas and
Tipoemas. And secondly, Buenos Aires has been the stage of important,
pioneering E-Lit projects since 2004 like Ludión (latin american
exploratory of poetic/politic technologies) directed by Claudia Kozak
that constitute the background of our work. Further, Buenos Aires will
host the 2015 E-Poetry festival, and thus has become a central stage to
talk about projects such as mine and Alex's.

*Hispanic Legacies* will take place at the University of Berkeley in the
Spring 2016 and bring to a close a series of collaborations that are in
the making with [Hermeneia](http://hermeneia.net/)in Barcelona and
[lleom](http://lleom.net) in Mexico City looking into specific aspects
of E-Lit in distinct social, literary, and scholarly contexts in Latin
America and the Iberian Peninsula. In that sense, even though we come
from those contexts, *Hispanic Legacies* is tightly linked to the North
American context in which Alex and I work as well as to its long and
deep tradition of E-Lit creation and scholarly explorations. The
objective of *Hispanic Legacies* is to reposition the place of Spanish
(and Portuguese) language experimentalism as alternative and/or
analogous origins of E-Lit practices commonly framed by Northerly
models. After all, as [Alex wrote
elsewhere](http://alexsaum.blogspot.com.es/2014/10/hispanic-legacies-una-muestra-de.html),
the origin of the project was the DHSI2014 course "“Electronic
Literature: Research and Practice.” Thus, the exhibit has a
self-reflexive component regarding the place of Latin American and
Iberian electronic literatures within the North American (academic)
geography and seeks to offer a retrospective look capable of opening new
and richer takes on the field.

With this in mind, *Hispanic Legacies* continues, expands, and dialogues
with previous E-Lit exhibits that have taken place in the US such as
[Electronic Literature and Its Emerging
Forms](http://dtc-wsuv.org/elit/elit-loc/) that took place at the
Library of Congress in 2013, as well as the MLA
[2012](http://dtc-wsuv.org/mla2012/),
[2013](http://dtc-wsuv.org/elit/mla2013/), and
[2014](http://dtc-wsuv.org/wp/pathfinders/exhibit/) exhibits. In her
curatorial statement of the exhibit at the Library of Congress and
following the work of Eduardo Kac and C.T. Funkhouser, Dene Grigar
proposed “that electronic literature is a natural outgrowth of literary
experimentation and human expression with roots in print literary forms
and, so, constitutes an organic form generating from the dynamic human
spirit that is evolving, will continue to evolve through time and
medium.” Our exhibit incorporates this and further proposes E-Lit works
as an ideal locus to observe individual materializations of the literary
that have manifested analogously regardless of language and geography in
the last century. Questions that we seek to explore include: In which
cases can we observe a dynamic of influence or a deliberate dialogue
between E-Lit works and the historic avant-garde? What specific media
conditions may have led to the creation of “proto-electronic” works and
how do they resemble other (E-Lit) media landscapes? Are works from the
historic avant-garde and E-Lit analogous, asynchronic, individual
materializations of the literary? And finally, what is the role of our
historical/archaeological critical eye in these theorizations?

In order to explore this, *Hispanic Legacies* will offer a wealth of
resources such as print books, artist books, and other material
artifacts along with a selection of electronic literary works in
Spanish, English, and some Portuguese. However, rather than offering a
lineal history of the development of E-Lit from the historical
avant-garde, the exhibit relies on a dynamic of productive
juxtaposition. The selection of works will be divided into four
thematic-material sections. The first one will focus on labyrinth and
endless writing, randomness, and infinite combinations. Section two will
be devoted to allegorical representations, circular time and
simultaneity. Section number three will look into materializations of
concretism and generativism. And, finally, the fourth section will bring
to the fore pre- and post- digital material tensions in the literary.

We hope *Hispanic Legacies* will contribute to highlight the relevance
of the Iberoamerican literary traditions in current theorizations about
media and literature. Further, the focus of the exhibit’s sections
proposes a look into the historical avant-garde and E-lit that does not
depend on technological developments alone, but, above all, on literary
and philosophical concerns that have recurred at different times and
under particular media conditions.

More soon...
