---
layout: post
title:  "Notes towards moving ideas around the DH world"
date:   2014-02-03 10:29:48 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---

\[Update: February 6th. I've translated this post into Spanish
[here](http://bit.ly/1kgCLNJ)\]

I don’t usually like to get involved in the controversial discussions on
Digital Humanities. As a junior scholar I feel too exposed to being
dismissed as inexperienced or, simply, not read. But in this case, the
matter’s too close to home not to say at least a bit on what I’ve learnt
in my years as a Spanish speaking DHer working in North America.

I’d like to begin with a recent anecdote.

A few weeks ago during the MLA convention I participated in the only
Spanish Literature DH panel: [New Digital Vanguards in Spanish
Literature](http://hybridspanish.commons.mla.org/). As many other DH
sessions it was included in Mark Sample’s [extensive
list](http://www.samplereality.com/2013/09/19/digital-humanities-at-mla-2014/).
And as many other DH sessions, it was widely successful–there were
people standing and sitting on the floor–the crowd was made up of a
large majority of Spanish speaking scholars. When I talked to fellow
non-Spanish speaking DHers, except for those who already knew me, I
realized none of them had heard about the session.

In casual conversation, a colleague suggested he might have overlooked
it because the session was in Spanish. When I pointed out that three out
of four presentations were given in English, he suggested that we
should’ve indicated that in the panel description, so that others knew
they could attend. The titles and abstracts of the presentations were in
English. I don’t know what, other that the word ‘Spanish’ on the session
title, might have given the impression that the session would be
conducted exclusively in Spanish. I want to believe it’s not a lack of
interest in non-Anglo DH; afterall, DHPoco’s session on Sunday morning
was packed too, but a matter of who brings attention to
non-Anglo-American DH to this context, of how to give visibility to what
and through which channels.

This anecdote and my blurry thoughts on it clicked on Saturday morning
when, like many others, I came across Domenico Fiormonte’s post
[Humanidades Digitales y Diversidad
Cultural](http://infolet.it/2014/02/01/humanidades-digitales-y-diversidad-cultural/)
and the ensuing [debates on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/melissaterras/status/430036332606652416)
over the weekend.

In that post, Fiormonte challenges the title, and the choice and
implications of the contents of *Defining Digital Humanities* (DDH).
Fiormonte’s main concern is how the focus on Anglo-American DH work
visible in collections such as DDH are fostering a skewed view of DH
around the world. Or as he summarized it on Twitter, “[The main point of
my critique was that DDH does not reflect DH outside anglo
world.”](https://twitter.com/fiormont/status/430087979655131136)
Responding to Bethany Nowviskie's
[tweet](https://twitter.com/nowviskie/status/429968032094777344) sharing
Fiormonte's post, Melissa Terras co-editor of the DDH collection argued
that DDH “[couldn't feature work which didn't already
exist](https://twitter.com/melissaterras/status/430036332606652416)” and
that the contents came “[from an analysis of most cited articles from
100+
courses](https://twitter.com/melissaterras/status/430099345489543168)”.
Though the methodology explains the selection, on the downside it leaves
out materials that, in Terras' words, “[no one reads or
cites](https://twitter.com/melissaterras/status/430101308755177472).”

Terras’ response has some points. It is fair not to know everything. It
is fair to acknowledgedly exclude things based on methodological
constraints and research or editorial objectives. But it is not fair to
say that things don’t exist because we don’t know them. As Fiormonte put
it, “[The "material" is out there since
1949](https://twitter.com/fiormont/status/430097488532353024).” It
almost seems unnecessary to say that much has been written on DH in many
languages, but it is not unnecessary.

Now, what’s out there? A lot and I don't think anyone could claim to
know it all. I know I can't, not even in Spanish, and that’s my fault
exclusively. However, I have learnt a bit since I started
[MapaHD](mapahd.org) (a survey on Spanish and Portuguese DHers) with
Silvia Gutiérrez, and that has led me to reflect on the issue of this
particular community’s visibility (or lack thereof) for a while.

From MapaHD, we have learnt that early researchers' trajectories stretch
back [over thirty years](http://mapahd.org/2013/11/19/temporal/) (a
token of the polygenetic origin of DH as Fiormonte calls it). Thanks to
Antonio Rojas Castro who started an [Humanidades
Digitales](https://www.zotero.org/groups/humanidades_digitales) Zotero
group in Spanish a few months back, we know that a lot has been written
since the early 1980’s, more than I had actually imagined. Rojas
Castro’s article “[A historical and bibliographical approach to the
emergence of Digital Humanities in
Spain](http://revistacaracteres.net/revista/vol2n2noviembre2013/el-mapa-y-el-territorio/?utm_source=buffer&utm_campaign=Buffer&utm_content=buffer66bcb&utm_medium=twitter)”
offers a fantastic tour of these findings. **** The Zotero group has
benefited from the contributions of about thirty members, and the
library has gathered 202 items.

So, there is material. Articles and blog posts have been written,
published, discussed, and archived. The archives of
[DiaHD](http://dhd2013.filos.unam.mx/) (DayofDH in Spanish and
Portuguese) are an incredible resource, by the way. The question then is
what’s missing? Why does all this work seem to some non-existent? What
has been the factor keeping from communication channels to be
established? Why is it that none, or very little, of it is included in
courses? Might it be just language? Why does no one read it? Who is that
‘no one’ Terras refers to? What is behind the “discursive domination” as
Fiormonte puts it? What can be done about it?

Isabel Galina very rightly pointed out the need to do translation to
favor a global DH community during her [DH2013
keynote](http://humanidadesdigitales.net/blog/2013/07/19/is-there-anybody-out-there-building-a-global-digital-humanities-community/).
Though totally right, her intuition seems to ask that Anglophone DH
projects/articles were translated into other languages. However, I
wonder if translations into English of DH projects in other languages
are a greater necessity. Risking gross generalization, it’s not DH
practitioners in other languages that need to come closer to
Anglo-American DH (in [El Humanista
Digital](http://elhumanistadigital.blogs.cultureplex.ca/index.php/2013/01/23/curso-mooc-en-espanol-el-humanista-digital/)
online course, though there were a few complains about assigning
readings in English, the majority of the students seemed to have no
issue with it) but the other way around. It’s the articles, blog posts,
and websites in other languages that seem to be in need of being
translated into English or risk going unnoticed from courses and
collections like DDH.

In a [different
article](http://humanidadesdigitales.net/blog/2013/11/08/las-humanidades-digitales-globales/),
Galina herself has listed four issues that might contribute to the lack
of visibility:

-   Communication channels predominantly Anglo-American are bound to
    produce information about *their* initiatives and projects.
-   Although *Digital Humanities* is predominant, there is work being
    done in other parts of the world and in other languages.
-   Little is known about the work done in other parts of the world.
-   Information about other DH projects is non-existent or has little
    visibility. (my translation)

Issues of academic predominance aside. Issues of DH genealogy aside as
well. Whether the work done around the world will be known by
Anglo-American DH or not is going to be, at least partially, a matter of
translation: linguistic as well as physical, since our beloved digital
channels and networks seem to be coming short.

Being a Spanish speaking DHer and working in North America, I have many
times wondered what I'd take on as my mission in this context. It is
equally a professional and a personal concern. How to bring
Anglo-American DH closer to Spanish speaking countries?  How to bring
Spanish speaking DH closer to English speaking countries? This issue has
worried me for a long time (I wrote about it
[here](http://dhd2013.filos.unam.mx/lectoradeficcion/2013/05/28/diahd-diadh/)
for DiaHD). I’d like to believe the two movements are not mutually
exclusive, but they are hard to mix. And in my extremely privileged
position, I’m specially wary of the first option and the risk of
becoming an agent of import contributing to build a Spanish speaking
audience in Fiormonte’s words “conforming to Anglophone models” or
something that looks like it. So I’ve tried to make a little dent in
Anglo-American DH through my research work, when I meet colleagues, and
through projects like MapaHD, which, incidentally, I started translating
a couple of months ago so that *it can reach a wider audience.*

One of the things I’ve been looking forward to show the world from
MapaHD is how taking as a starting point the center-centric DH praxis,
we can [see how inadequate the notion of 'center'
was](http://mapahd.org/2013/12/10/coordenadas-del-mapa/) to provide a
fair representation and location of the DH praxis around the Spanish and
Portuguese speaking worlds. An absence of centers in Mexico or
Argentina–to use two examples that radically stand out in CenterNet’s
map–certainly does not imply a deficit for DH practitioners in said
places, but it does mean that particular work dynamics have been put in
place for DH to thrive there too. Far from questioning the soundness of
said practices, the issue is how can they be incorporated into a
center-centric DH? How can they be invited in? This is a token example,
but it’s also very telling of how adjusting the ‘terms’ and tweaking
‘the measuring system’ (from center to initiative/project, for example),
can lead to discover a wide variety of practices, approaches, and
definitions.

I’ve been pondering about this example above all as a starting point to
think how that adjustment or tweaking can be done on a larger scale: to
actually and consistently move people and their ideas around the world.
I can only imagine that bringing scholars from around the world to North
American and UK forums; facilitating the translation into English of
even a little bit of the work that’s been done; and other ways of being
inviting would have an equally favorable effect. This is something that
we need to get used to working for as a community. Still, not everything
would be read by everybody, not everything would be cited everywhere,
but it would be harder to say that work done around the world doesn’t
exist.

Multilingual translation is becoming the norm for conference CFP in the
field. On the institutional side why not make it part of the ADHO’s
Multi-lingualism and Multi-culturalism committee to search for and
translate into various languages a selection of articles and blog posts
annually or bi-annually. Non-institutionally, why not those of us who
can do it, pick an article/blog post written in a language we can read,
and translate it into our first language. It is an effort well worth
some extra time/work/people. It is also something that can fruitfully be
incorporated into DH courses and seminars: a way to engage hands-on and
be responsible of the diversity of the DH field. And it is certainly
something that we’d like to see be part of the global DH community if
we’re to call it so.

\*Many thanks to Josh Honn for his comments and suggestions during the
writing of this post.
