---
layout: post
title:  "Random Borges | Infinite E-Lit: A Look from Hispanic Legacies"
date:   2015-03-22 10:29:48 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---

This is the abstract of the talk I will be giving at the [Hall Center
for Humanities at KU](http://hallcenter.ku.edu/) as part of the [Digital
Humanities Seminar on March
25^th^](http://hallcenter.ku.edu/event/65958).

As indicated in the title, this talk is part of the larger
research/curatorial project [*Hispanic Legacies in Electronic
Literature*](http://elikaortega.net/2014/11/18/hispanic-legacies-electronic-literature-trace-experimental-writing-spain-latin-america/)
that I’ve been working on with [Alex
Saum-Pascual](http://www.alexsaum.com) for the last few months. As the
whole project is still a work in progress, please excuse the plethora of
developing ideas and feel free to provide constructive feedback. I'm
hoping to share the slides soon too.

\*\*\*\*\*

In this paper I propose a juxtaposition between Argentinian writer Jorge
Luis Borges’ imagined figures of infinity such as "The Library of
Babel," "The Aleph," and "The Book of Sand" and contemporary examples of
Electronic Literature (E-Lit) that analogously and literally enact
endlessness in reading and writing. Media figures of infinity—the
conceptual and structural strategies used by writers to shape,
structure, and create infinites (or boundless electronic literary
works)—underscore the tensions between the life span of artworks and
their conceptual underpinnings, the machines and code that materialize
them, and the people reading them. In that sense, while some of the
works selected directly address Borges’ own media infinity figures and
in a way enact or materialize them, others constitute an analogous
instantiation of deep time literary and/or philosophical
concerns—something that Joseph Tabbi has called “relocations of the
literary.”

In Borges’ stories, the infinite library, the Aleph, and the book of
sand all sway from a being objects of fascination and wonder at first,
to disquieting and even destructive ones—the house that holds the Aleph
is demolished; librarians in the Library of Babel often commit suicide;
the narrator in the book of sand has to hide the codex in order to
regain his sanity. Taking this ambivalence as a starting point, I
explore how it is incorporated into infinite E-Lit works that
instantiate a poetics of the humanly possible—where their
spatial-temporal dimensions are inaccessible (even ungraspable) for
readers.

I look at four media figures of infinity and a couple of examples for
each one: endless generative texts (Dan Waber’s
[*Sestinas*](http://chapbookpublisher.com/sestinas.html), Nick
Montfort’s [*Taroko Gorge* +
remixes](http://nickm.com/poems/taroko_gorge.html)), infinite loops
(Waber’s [*Argument 1*](http://vispo.com/guests/DanWaber/argument.html)
and [*2*](http://vispo.com/guests/DanWaber/argument2.html), and Matt
Schneider’s [*Babelling Borges*](https://twitter.com/BabellingBorges)),
infinite canvas (Nick Montfort and Stephanie Strickland’s [*Sea and Spar
Between*](http://winteranthology.com/works/vol-3-works/montfort-strickland/seaandspar/),
Mark Sample’s [*House of Grass of
Leaves*](http://fugitivetexts.net/houseleavesgrass/)and Laura McGee’s
[*Infinite Notebook*](http://www.dreamfeeel.com/infinite-notebook/)),
and data-mined social media founds (Jim Andrews’
[*Teleporter*](http://vispo.com/teleporter/webios/index.html) and David
Hirmes’s [*Infinite Wonder, Infinite Pity*](http://hirmes.com/aleph/)).
Even when not exhaustive, this sample of infinite E-Lit suggests an
identifiable interest with the possible dimensions of electronic
literary works in tension with the material constraints of the machine’s
life spans, software obsolescence, and our own capacity of reading and
forces the question of what the friction between endlessness and
material limitations tells us about the literary in a culture of
technology in which nothing endures.

Update March 26: Slides are now available via
[Figshare.](http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1356172)

Update April 6: The talk was recorded and there is now [a video
available here](https://t.co/zl5nBNI5Wp).
