---
layout: post
title:  "Experiments in Reading"
date:   2015-05-03 10:29:48 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---

I’ve never watched *Battlestar Galactica*, so I don’t really know what
the particular fuzz in the *Portlandia* sketch below is all about.
However, I’ve been in Doug’s (Fred Armisen) and Claire’s (Carrie
Brownstein) shoes––I know too well the feeling of wanting to watch just
one more episode of\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. As a matter of
fact, in a totally meta experience I watched this episode of
*Portlandia* during a binge watching weekend a few years ago.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/yYjLrJRuMnY" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The scene above and [its follow
up](https://youtu.be/gzY7POVQhp0?t=3m30s) highlight (hyperbolically as
per the show’s satiric tone) the feeling of loss and dejection that are
so hard to keep at bay when suddenly exiting a fictional world we have
been inhabiting for a while. The experience is surely not one exclusive
to TV series, and many of us will have memories of binge reading long
novels as kids as well as in later years. I recall spending three blurry
days madly turning each of the 600 pages in the Spanish edition of
Roberto Bolaño’s *Savage Detectives* about a decade ago, and more
recently, a couple of days with Chimamanda Adichie’s *Americanah* and
two or three frantic hours devouring Maggie Nelson’s *Bluets*. I also
distinctly recall physically missing the presence of the characters and
the narrative voices each time, and finding everything but those worlds
utterly boring for a short while afterwards. This form and level of
immersion has been thematized not just in *Portlandia*, obviously, but
also in countless metafictions and explored in many kinds of studies
ranging from cognitive criticism and neuroscience to, again, metafiction
and others. I myself wrote [a bit about
it](http://elikaortega.net/2013/02/06/metafiction-theory-of-mind-and-unamuno/)and
Miguel de Unamuno's *Niebla* a couple of years ago.

The general consensus of why this happens (cognitively speaking) is that
we use the exact same mental mechanisms to deal with both fictional
worlds and the real ones (whatever that might mean metaphysically).
Getting immersed in a fictional world puts fiction and fact on the same
undiscriminated stand. Richard Gerrig sees this kind of mental immersion
as moving from the actual immediate surroundings and relocating in the
fictional world.

An important consideration is that immersion (or binge watching) lasts
only as long as there is more to read, more to watch—a continuous supply
of input from the fiction that can be put on top of our immediate
surroundings. The dimensions of the fictional world depends, of course,
on the limits of the work (they all end at some point), the boundaries
of its distribution systems, and the way the reader/viewer actually
handles and mediates the work. Thus, it is crucial to think about, at
least, two material aspects of the works: 1) The fact that fictional or
literary worlds are not made up of air, and thus our engagement with—and
mediation of—them is governed by the limitations or affordances of the
artifact that embodies them; and 2) The media configuration of each
fiction/each work generates its specific (reading or watching)
conditions: episodic, continuous, etc.

Coming back to *Portlandia*, Doug and Claire have the whole season in
DVD’s. The kind of immersion they go through is only possible due to the
fact that they mediate and handle their engagement with the fictional
world stored in them. Although it’s not showed on the screen, we assume
they obtain subsequent seasons of *Battlestar Galactica* to keep them
going for days. Other than the fact that there are no more episodes to
watch, the only real impediment to their binge watching is a power
outage: an invisible infrastructure that sustains their immersion. The
work and its distribution systems (including the infrastructure that
supports it) imposes the physicality of the medium above the existence
of the fictional world. This is true, or at least similar, for most long
novels. As long as we hold the entire book in our hands (or have the
entire file in an e-reader) we can go on binge reading. In fact, we
could binge read any print or e-book. There is very little in the
specific material reading conditions imposed by the medium that would
prevent us from it (in the case of the e-reader, power would be one).

A very different experience for Doug and Claire (and me when I first
watched this episode) would have been to watch the series episode by
episode as they were released by the network. A very different
experience would also be to read the first part of *Savage Detectives*
episodically following the dates of the diary entries. In the first
case, Doug and Claire’s experience would be mediated by the distribution
of the work (let’s leave aside the economic model that shapes this for
now), whereas in the second case, it is only suggested but not imposed
by the composition of the work.

I think this is an extremely intriguing phenomenon in the current media
ecology. Each device and each work have a temporality embedded that may
or may not be a part of the a work's meaning making mechanisms, but that
are definitely a part of the way each reader handles and mediates their
reading (binge, episodic, fragmentary, hypermediated, etc.). Some works
and distribution systems impose certain specific reading conditions, but
others might just suggest it. In any case, exploring the various
possibilities is worth a try.

In order to carry out a little experiment in reading mediation, I waited
a few months to start reading [Amaranth Borsuk and Andy
Fitch’s](http://www.subitopress.org/as-we-know) *As We Know*, the
daybook of a student spanning from April 30^th^ to July 1^st^. On April
30^th^ I read the very first entry and as of today, I have read four
entries. Fighting the urge to binge read just one more day (two more
pages), I’m thinking through time-based reading: a notion I more easily
recognize and theorize in electronic works where, as Rita Raley has it,
reading and the boundaries of a digital text are delineated by “the
period in which both the reader-user and the system are performing”
([The Digital Loop: Feedback and
Recurrence](http://www.leoalmanac.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/LEA-v10-n7.pdf)).
*As We Know* is even a more particular case because it is a poetry
collection but one that moves temporally, and although I can't be sure
yet, narratively, I think.

<div class="img_row">
    <img class="col three" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/asweknow.jpg">
</div>

Even though *As We Know* does not impose materially this kind of
episodic reading condition, it invites and evokes it. The work certainly
conjures a very particular reading and it collapses the separate
temporalities of both authors (Fitch 2007 and Borsuk 2013) A reading
like the one I’m doing is a deliberate way to relocate the days
contained in *As We Know* in my days, to blend the temporal referents of
both and *run* them synchronously. That way, if a change in the original
distribution conditions of *Battlestar Galactica* and *Portlandia*
modify the conditions in which they can be watched and the immersive
effect they have, the question I’ll be thinking through until July 1^st^
is how does a speculative handling of the time frames in *As We Know*
can shape the reading conditions embedded in the print book?
