---
layout: post
title:  "Crisscrossing Borders: GO::DH Regional Networks
in Dialogue"
date:   2016-01-13 10:29:48 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---

UPDATE: This talk is now published as [“Zonas de Contacto: A Digital Humanities Ecology of Knowledges.”](https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/read/untitled-f2acf72c-a469-49d8-be35-67f9ac1e3a60/section/aeee46e3-dddc-4668-a1b3-c8983ba4d70a#ch15) in [Debates in the Digital Humanities 2019](https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/projects/debates-in-the-digital-humanities-2019).

\[On Friday January 8, 2016, I had the great pleasure of taking part of
the [MLA16 DH at the
Borders](https://apps.mla.org/program_details?prog_id=400A&year=2016). I
shared the session with Jim English, Alex Gil, and Anita Say Chan. We
were extremely lucky to have a generous audience who asked really
thought provoking questions. Thank you to all of them and my fellow
panelists. Below is a slightly edited version of my presentation that
night.\]

 

**Crisscrossing Borders: GO::DH Regional Networks in Dialogue**

In this presentation I wish to raise two questions of the current state
of global diversity in DH informed by my work in the GO::DH executive
committee. On the one hand, an interrogation of the role of Global
Outlook::Digital Humanities as a Special Interest Group of the Alliance
of Digital Humanities Organizations and the tensions that exist between
an international centralized organization like ADHO and a global
non-centralized one. And on the other, I want to ask what can be some
strategies to foster diversity in centralized DH now that a number of
projects and publications have made us fully aware that a huge array of
DH work is and has been done all over the world?

I take as an axis of my reflection the work of the Portuguese scholars
Boaventura de Sousa Santos, Joao Arriscado Nunes, and Maria Paula
Meneses, in particular three of their concepts: the notion of ecology of
knowledges, the internal tension of multiculturalism as description
\*and\* project, and finally the strategy of horizontal translation
("[Opening Up the Canon of Knowledge and Recognition of
Difference](http://www.boaventuradesousasantos.pt/media/Introduction%283%29.pdf)").
Even though their work looks into the geopolitics of knowledge
production in general, my intention is to identify the coincidences
found in global DH practice. So here, first I want to survey how under
different names much work has been done to articulate and evidence the
extremely diverse work in DH, that is of what I, following de Sousa
Santos, Nunes, and Meneses, propose to think as the ecology of
knowledges of DH. Then, I’ll argue how all the self-reflexive work done
in the field should be preparing us to devise strategies of recognition
and redistribution — that is a sort of commons among the different
regions, approaches, and their intersections while still keeping its
particularities. Ultimately my intention is to reflect on the horizontal
relationships GO::DH as a global group struggling with its own
Western-ness has sought to establish with regional networks and
organizations in order to gain a better understanding of the
local/global dimensions of DH work.

**An ecology of knowledges in DH**

De Sousa Santos, Nunes, and Meneses establish that "The epistemic
diversity of the world is open, since all knowledge is situated. There
are neither pure nor complete knowledges; there are constellations of
knowledges"(xl-xli). Further, they argue “The ecology of knowledges is
an invitation to the promotion of non-relativistic dialogues among
knowledges, granting "equality of opportunities" to the different kinds
of knowledges engaged in even broader epistemological disputes aimed
both at maximizing their respective contributions to build a more
democratic and just society and at decolonizing knowledge and power"
(xx). The Portuguese scholars' characterization of knowledge diversity,
situatedness, and democratization resonates with many of the discourses
advocating for the openness, inclusivity, and locality of Digital
Humanities that lie at the basis of the title of this session, DH at the
Border.

Big tent notions of DH that have emerged from the "centers of
gravity"--[as Jacque Wernimont calls
them](https://jwernimont.wordpress.com/2015/11/13/ferocious-generosity/)--could
seem to have no borders and be all inclusive or at least have the
potential and willingness to be so.  As stated in its [code of
conduct](http://adho.org/administration/conference-coordinating-program-committee/adho-conference-code-conduct),
ADHO "works actively toward the creation of a more diverse, welcoming,
and inclusive global community of digital humanities scholars and
practitioners." Since DH has long been (and continues to be) ideally
articulated as interdisciplinary, fluid, porous, open, collaborative,
edgy, always changing--in a way kind of borderless, and in short free of
restrictions--how can we draw the border or borders in DH? What is/are
the edges of the field?

This is not a new question and the answers are not hard to find, indeed
the borders are everywhere we look: gender, race and ethnicity,
language, levels of access, infrastructure, training opportunities,
epistemological models, funding opportunities, and a long et cetera.

Promising steps have been taken recently at ADHO. For example the 5+1
languages accepted for DH2016 proposals and the optional demographics
questionnaire available for all proposal authors on the submissions
system. Initiatives whose results we all hope will become the
springboard for new ones. Nevertheless, international or big tent DH
continues to be largely a place of singularity and convergence, one
where the margins may be taken in but the borders are not always crossed
or lowered--indeed a sort of universalism of DH that has, as [Jamie Skye
Bianco puts it](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/9), "rendered
the many under the name of one." [As Amy Earhart
argues](http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/idx/e/etlc/13455322.0001.001/1:3/--traces-of-the-old-uses-of-the-new-the-emergence-of-digital?g=dculture;rgn=div1;view=fulltext;xc=1),
efforts “to diversify scholarly questions and methodologies, \[have\]
often \[been\] viewed as a direct assault on scholarly rigor and
exclusiveness” of a cohesive community.

Cohesiveness or singularity in DH and the tensions it entails is not
only a problem in literary digital studies in the US as Earhart rightly
points out even though that’s the focus of her study. Feminist, queer,
racial, indigenous, class, and other approaches have pushed back aiming
to emancipate their voices within the singular DH. Happily, this has led
us to, as Miriam Posner concisely sums it up in "[What’s Next: The
Radical, Unrealized Potential of Digital
Humanities](http://miriamposner.com/blog/whats-next-the-radical-unrealized-potential-of-digital-humanities/),"
arrive at the understanding, though not always the agreement, that "DH
needs scholarly expertise in critical race theory, feminist and queer
theory, and other interrogations of structures of power in order to
develop models of the world that have any relevance to people’s lived
experience."

Along the same lines, in her “[An Information Science Question in DH
Feminism](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/2/000186/000186.html),”
Tanya Clement very interestingly questions the ideals of
interdisciplinarity and collaboration as technologies that can unsituate
us from particular--in this case, feminist--visions. For her,
"interdisciplinarity is most useful when it becomes a technology that
affords our ability to better situate ourselves: to see how we see, from
where we see, who is interpreting the field (and who is not), the limits
to our vision, and what we see when what we see is situated in relation
to other visions"

If the singularity of DH is a local problem in the US and among critical
cultural approaches, the landscape is much more complex when adding
geopolitical borders--as [Alex Gil has put
it](http://elotroalex.webfactional.com/a-non-peer-reviewed-review-of-a-peer-reviewed-essay-by-adeline-koh/)"A
whole world of digital humanities is out there and it does not map
neatly to our \[US\] issues."

For example, from her work in India and speaking at the[Digital
Diversity](http://digitaldiversity2015.org/)conference and
controversially articulating her "my DH is not your DH," Padmini Ray
Murray puts forward how "the contours of DH shift depending on where one
is located (both research and self) and how theoretical practice
emerging in global south has to adapt to different infrastructures,
languages and technologies" (notes shared by the author). Further, more
punctual conceptualizations of locality can be found in Roopika Risam's
“[DH
accents](http://roopikarisam.com/uncategorized/across-two-imperial-cultures-2/)”
as the "practices, theories, preferences that look different and are
informed by local context." Risam has further argued in favor of
intersectionality as the vehicle “[to understand the position of those
whose work dwells in the peripheries, to understand the historical
legacies that link knowledge production with the denigration – even the
destruction – of that which is
other](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/2/000208/000208.html)."

In *[The Digital Humanist: A Critical
Inquiry](http://punctumbooks.com/titles/the-digital-humanist/)* recently
translated from the Italian and published in the US, Domenico Fiormonte,
Teresa Numerico, and Francesca Tomasi sustain that "Beyond Big Data,
mega-platforms and the mass archivation of data, the true innovation of
the next decade of dh appears to be its geographic expansion and the
consequent enlargement (and deepening) of \[the cultural problems
afforded by the use of technology from a less Western-centric
perspective\]" (207).  Ray Murray also sees diversification as a means
to "add further nuance to ongoing discussions as to the state of the
field, and indeed, extend the limits of the discipline itself" (notes
from the author).

It is evident from the work of all of these great digital humanists,
deep critical meditations on the diverse dimension of DH, that
situatedness and locality are not only the necessary place of
self-reflexive work, but also an indispensable basis to interlink
peripheral, border, global south DH practice with mainstream and
canonical DH work. This is what de Sousa Santos, Nunes, and Meneses see
as an ecology of knowledges. Moreover, this wealth of work has been
extremely successful at highlighting the blind spots of the field and
really making it impossible to negate the existence, quality, validity,
and richness of diverse DH work.

That said, how do we do justice to that diversity? how do we move from a
still rather singular convergent model of DH in our centers of gravity
that needs constant pushing back? to, as Earhart puts it, “[a return to
activist digital innovation that is divergent, not
convergent](http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/idx/e/etlc/13455322.0001.001/1:3/--traces-of-the-old-uses-of-the-new-the-emergence-of-digital?g=dculture;rgn=div1;view=fulltext;xc=1)”?
Or to foster a true DH ecology of knowledge, that is critical,
intersectional, interdisciplinary, and global?

Answers to this question are not easily found. Going back to de Sousa
Santos, Nunes, and Meneses, they insist on self-reflexivity and the
discovery of hereo-referentiality as the first step towards an ecology
of knowledge (xxi). While DH has certainly not lacked self-reflexivity,
much of it has taken place or been aimed at its non-specific, tactical,
big tent ideation. Thus, it remains the case that there is little
awareness and dialogue across the borders, and even when it does take
place, it rarely makes it back. Our sources (in syllabuses, anthologies,
reading lists, works cited lists), more than we would like to, have for
the most part converged in a canon. A plurality of sources that are not
only acknowledged but written about, listened to and spoken to is still
lacking from them. In [previous
posts](http://elikaortega.net/2014/02/03/notes-towards-moving-ideas-around-the-dh-world/)
and flash projects like [RedHD in
translation](http://dayofdh2014.matrix.msu.edu/redhd/), I’ve sustained
that this is in part a matter of language and the [local/global
scalability of the
field](http://elikaortega.net/2014/07/02/scalability/). But
multilinguality alone so far has not yielded the results we would’ve
hoped. As [Martin Grandjean showed in
DH2014](http://www.martingrandjean.ch/multilinguisme-dans-la-science-dh2014/),
linguistic diversity continued to be rather poor in the conference
program. Conversely, my and Alex Gil’s experience as [DH
whisperers](http://elikaortega.net/2014/07/21/dhwhisperer/) was the
opposite: there was indeed a great linguistic diversity that went
largely unacknowledged in official channels. To my mind, this is
indicative of how most aspects of diversity are not dependent on
language, especially within a community that, for good or bad, has
adopted a lingua franca. In parallel, on the organization level,
Fiormonte, Numerico, and Tomasi observe that "regional or national
associations reflect cultural and juridical practices that cannot be
fully implemented within ADHO"(216) and I would add within any
convergent, or big tent notion of DH whether it comes from our bigger
organizations or from smaller centers—the scales are simply not the
same. Usefully, Barbara Bordalejo recently published a survey that will
gather crucial information on several aspects of diversity, most
importantly for me here, movement of DH practitioners across countries.

What we see in all of this work, and what we’ve seen in the sessions
yesterday and today, is a increasingly more widespread interest in
diversifying DH. We see it in the emergence of organizations around the
world, we see it within our organization’s committees, and we see it in
the projects that are being done in the US and outside. “The new house
of the digital humanist is already taking shape" (19) or so say
Fiormonte, Numerico, and Tomasi. I don’t think we doubt that DH is again
reshaping—not in the ways that it has for decades, but in a new
meaningful way that changes not just the way we do our scholarship, but
the way we perceive and relate to the world where we do our scholarship.
But my question to the Italian scholars is what bricks are being used to
shape that hous?  And even more so, again, is it only one house?  "A
politics of cultural diversity and mutual intelligibility,” says de
Sousa Santos “calls for a complex procedure of reciprocal and horizontal
translation rather than for a general theory" (xxv). Following the house
metaphor, rather than building a house or many houses we need the roads
leading from one to another. Our modest attempt to do this at GO::DH has
been establishing links with Regional Networks, that we later called
Affiliated Networks.

**Regional Networks and Horizontal Translation**

First ideated during DH2014 in Lausanne and put to long and fruitful
discussions at GO::DH, the general ideas behind the networks were
several:\
1.    to establish stronger relationships with DH communities around the
world that already existed like RedHD, AHDig, and the ones in formation
like SADH, and three South African groups.\
2.    always aware of our Western-ness, we also sought to increase the
diversity in the group at large as well as in the Executive Committee in
order to help push the conversation further towards the local/global;\
3.    to develop initiatives that more consistently moved towards
inclusion without obscuring differences, locality, and situatedness;\
4.    to better fulfill our mission learning from knowledge and
experiences from all over the world; and\
5.    to keep out of the networks’ self-organization,
self-determination, and long term plans

We saw our relationship to these networks as a horizontal platform that
wouldn't necessarily be mediated by the organizations and "centers of
gravity" already in place. Fair criticisms came in the form of GO::DH
becoming a new center of gravity on its own only for the Global South, a
filter or guide path towards ADHO constituency, and exporting our
notions of DH all over the world. Nevertheless, even when we continue to
aim for the global, it’s in our name and we still like it, the work with
the networks’ members is done at the local levels that cumulatively form
the non-convergent, non-singular, and situated globality we claim. We
aim with this to get close to the horizontal translation posited by de
Sousa, Nunes, and Meneses:

> "This theory of translation \[they state\] allows common ground to be
> identified in an indigenous struggle, a feminist struggle, an
> ecological struggle, etc., without erasing the autonomy and difference
> of each of them. Translation is also fundamental to the articulation
> between the diverse and specific intellectual and cognitive resources
> that are expressed through the various modes of producing knowledge
> about counter-hegemonic initiatives and experiences, aimed at
> redistribution and recognition and the construction of new
> configurations of knowledge anchored in local, situated forms of
> experience and struggle." (xxvi)

Further, for them the articulation and activation of recognition and
redistribution is the key outcome as it constitutes “the path to the
proliferation of local public spheres that are, at the same time, able
to establish translocal connections \[…\] and genuinely cosmopolitan
citizenships" (xxvii).” In short and now bringing their theorizations to
our field, the recognition of diversity in DH has not yet turned into a
redistribution of forums or audiences. But again, there are important
steps that we hope we’ll become more exemplary.

For example, the recently published [CLIR’s report Building Expertise to
Support Digital Scholarship: A Global
Perspective](http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub168) by Vivian Lewis,
Lisa Spiro, Xuemao Wang, and Jon E. Cawthorne relied “on site visits and
interviews of practicing digital scholars from around the world to
ground their conclusions and recommendations.” This approach to shape
Digital Scholarship in the US over a globally aware basis—even if it’s a
pilot project that comes out of one such centers of gravity—has the
potential to initiate more consistent exchanges among scholars in far
away regions of the world.

To conclude, I want turn really quickly to our still in-development
project The Translation Toolkit, which is also hoping to provide a basis
for local/global connections. On the surface its purpose is to offer a
set of strategies and ready-made tools to aid the translation of
conference talks, websites, journals, etc. But deep down, the way I want
to think about it now, and the way I want to explore the practice coming
out of it, is the possibility fostering the other kind of translation:
the movement of ideas around the world, fomenting in de Sousa’s words
hetero-referentiality, the establishing of a DH global ecology of
knowledge, and facilitating the redistribution of knowledge, forums, and
audiences.
